[docs] Add a snippet downloader, Vue component, pre-build step and CI integration (#124)
hyperledger/iroha-2-docs: src/documenting/snippets.md

## Internals

### Vue tab component

The custom component file, that displays tabs is called `SnippetTabs.vue`.
It is located in `.vitepress/theme/components/` directory.

```typescript
import Vue3TouchEvents from "vue3-touch-events";
import SnippetTabs from './components/SnippetTabs.vue'
// …
export default {
  // …
  enhanceApp({ app }) {
    app.use(Vue3TouchEvents);
    app.component('SnippetTabs', SnippetTabs);
  }
}
```

It is using the [Vue3TouchEvents](https://github.com/robinrodricks/vue3-touch-events) plugin for mobile support.
To install it, use `npm i vue3-touch-events` or `pnpm i vue3-touch-events` command.

### Parser plugin integration

The Markdown parser section is enabled in `.vitepress/config.ts`, in the `markdown` → `config` section:

```javascript
{
    markdown: {
        config(md) {
            md.use(footnote);
            snippets_plugin(md, {'snippet_root': resolve(__dirname, '../src/snippets/')})
        }
    }
}
```

Note that `snippet_root` directory path is required, otherwise the user has to point out the paths.

[^1]: JSON dicts with `version`, `url` and `lang` parameters

> [^2]: Related videos: “[What is a monad? (Design Pattern)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VgA4wCaxp-Q)”, “[The Absolute Best Intro to Monads For Software Engineers](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C2w45qRc3aU)”.

Reviewer: Obsolete footnote.

# Code snippets

Iroha development happens around three important branches:
[`dev`](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha/tree/iroha2-dev),
[`stable`](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha/tree/iroha2-stable) and
[`LTS`](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha/tree/iroha2-lts).

With that in mind, documenting all the API versions manually has
limitations: at some point, the content in one of the branches will be
different compared to the documentation. Moreover, code in the

> documentation sometimes may contain typos and being able to run it won't be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
documentation may contain typos sometimes, and being able to run it won't be
```

> guaranteed without testing. This raises a question on showing the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
guaranteed without testing. This raises questions about showing the
```

> difference between branches for the new developers semi-automatically.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
differences between branches for the new developers semi-automatically.
```

Our solution is to use a custom syntax in the code comments to mark the

> snippets with [dst-parser](https://github.com/soramitsu/dst-parser). We

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
snippets with the [dst-parser](https://github.com/soramitsu/dst-parser). We
```

configure URLs in a custom JSON config file and automatically query the
related URLs both on local builds and CI.

In addition, we're also using a custom
[markdown-it](https://github.com/markdown-it/markdown-it) plugin, so that
we can easily include the resulting snippets.

## Workflow

### Preparing the requirements

After you run `npm install` or `pnpm install`, a prebuilder script may run.
It would ensure that an output directory for the snippets (`src/snippets`)
exists, and ask if you want to download the examples if those are
unavailable.

> Alternatively, you can run the prebuilder with `npm run postinstall` or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you can run the prebuilder with the `npm run postinstall` or
```

> `pnpm run postinstall` command.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the `pnpm run postinstall` commands.
```

### Getting snippets

To download and convert the raw files, type: `pnpm run get_snippets`.

This will run a script that:

- downloads each snippet file in parallel
- parses them using a
  [dst-parser](https://www.npmjs.com/package/dst-parser) and extracts
  individual examples
- exports the parsed snippets into the individual code files in
  `src/snippets` directory
- exports the JSON metadata file (`meta.json`) into the same directory

The filename is formatted like this: `version_lang_name.extension`.

This approach allows attaching all the examples by their names from the
custom component of the project's documentation system. This component is
implemented using [Vue](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vue.js), which is

> already used in [VitePress](https://vitepress.vuejs.org/) documentation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
already used in the [VitePress](https://vitepress.vuejs.org/) documentation
```

generator, and is called with a custom Markdown syntax described below in
this article.

### Defining the sources for the documentation

> To collect the code, we're using custom

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To collect the code, we're using a custom
```

[NPM](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Npm_(software)>) script; it reads a
configuration list from a file named `snippet_sources.json` in the
documentation root, obtaining a list of items, each of which contains:

> - `url`: a `URL` of a file to parse, supports `http://`, `https://` and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `url`: the `URL` of a file to parse, it supports `http://`, `https://` and
```

>   relative file URLs, mainly used for [GitHub](https://github.com/) raw

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  relative file URLs, and it is mainly used for [GitHub](https://github.com/) raw
```

  files
- `lang`: a language to highlight using
  [Shiki](https://github.com/shikijs/shiki/)
- `version`: a branch or Iroha version (for example, `stable`, `dev` or
  `lts`), which is used in file prefixes to distinguish between similar
  snippet names

> Generally, we want two types of files to be used as documentation source:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Generally, we want two types of files to be used as documentation sources:
```

> - raw sources from [GitHub](https://github.com/), because it is easy to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- raw sources from [GitHub](https://github.com/), because they are easy to
```

  parse and there's no additional markup
- source code files to use in this demo

> Let's check the contents of `snippet_sources.json` example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's check the contents of the `snippet_sources.json` example:
```

```json
[
  {
    "version": "stable",
    "url": "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/username/project/stable/examples/filename.rs",
    "lang": "rust"
  },
  {
    "version": "dev",
    "url": "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/username/project/dev/examples/filename.rs",
    "lang": "rust"
  },
  {
    "version": "lts",
    "url": "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/username/project/lts/examples/filename.rs",
    "lang": "rust"
  }
]
```

> We could have as many source definitions[^1] inside the list here, but each

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We could have many source definitions[^1] inside this list, but each
```

definition, represented as a dictionary, is required to have the properties

> displayed above: `version`, `url`, `lang`. At a later date, there may be an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
displayed above: `version`, `url`, `lang`. At a later date, automatic language detection
```

> automatic language detection added.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
may be added.
```

## Code comment syntax

> Currently, [dst-parser](https://github.com/soramitsu/dst-parser) supports

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently, the [dst-parser](https://github.com/soramitsu/dst-parser) supports
```

two comment formats: C-like (`//`) and Pythonic (`#`). Multiline comments
(`/* … */` and `""" … """`) are not parsed. The supported languages are:
Rust, C, C++, Java, JavaScript and Python.

A piece of code is considered a named fragment when it is located between
`// BEGIN FRAGMENT: <name>` and `// END FRAGMENT`, where `<>` signs are not
included. This syntax is case-sensitive. Names support alphanumeric

> characters, underscores, minus signs and whitespaces.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
characters, underscores, minus signs, and whitespaces.
```

> Fragments can be included in one another. In that case the lines matching

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Fragments can be included in one another. In that case, the lines matching
```

`// BEGIN FRAGMENT: <name>` and `// END FRAGMENT` are removed.

Elements between `// BEGIN ESCAPE` and `// END ESCAPE` are excluded
unconditionally from the tutorial.

While defining a code documentation, you can use both underscores and

> whitespaces. It is preferrable to use whitespaces, because those are used

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
whitespaces. It is preferable to use whitespaces, because they're used
```

> for prefixing the branch names.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for prefixing branch names.
```

> The current version of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The current version of the 
```

[dst-parser](https://github.com/soramitsu/dst-parser) currently supports
both normal URLs and `file:///` paths (which were only tested on Linux).

Considering the current design, specifically the layout and font

> configuration, the optimal width for the doc comments is 66 characters,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
configuration, the optimal width for doc comments is 66 characters,
```

starting with a comment symbol(s). If there's a common padding behind each
line, it is also removed. If the content is too long, it won't fit normally
and a scrollbar will appear.

## Using the custom Markdown syntax

> With [dst-parser](https://github.com/soramitsu/dst-parser) and downloader

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the [dst-parser](https://github.com/soramitsu/dst-parser) and downloader
```

doing their parts of the task, it is possible to import the snippets. A
single file that was added may contain more than one example. The syntax
may look like this:

```
+++
branch_a file A.rs
branch_b file B.py
branch_c file C.js
+++
```

In this example, our snippet files (`A.rs`, `B.py`, `C.js`) are located in
a default snippet directory: `src/snippets/`.

One can include the snippets from different directories for debug purposes

> if needed using a path relative to the directory, containing the snippets:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
if needed, using a path relative to the directory, containing the snippets:
```

```
+++ ../ALTERNATIVE_SNIPPET_DIR
branch_a file A.rs
branch_b file B.py
branch_c file C.js
+++
```

The Markdown parser part is separated from the
[dst-parser](https://www.npmjs.com/package/dst-parser) so that each file is
not requested and parsed only a single time.

A [markdown-it](https://github.com/markdown-it/markdown-it) parser plugin
outputs a code for an internal
[Vue component](https://vuejs.org/guide/essentials/component-basics.html),
`SnippetTabs`. It is called by [VitePress](https://vitepress.vuejs.org/) to
display the result.

## Demo

+++ debug_java_Lorem.java debug_python_Lorem.py debug_javascript_Lorem.js
debug_typescript_Lorem.ts debug_rust_Lorem.rs debug_shell_Lorem.sh +++

## Troubleshooting

### Missing files

Sometimes, you may encounter an error while running documentation builds or
the development mode.

```
SnippetAccessError: Unable to read a file.
Ensure it exists, its location is correct and its access rights allow to read it.
Filename: "snippet_x.html".
Directory path: "…src/snippets".
```

> This error will be displayed both with `npm run build` and `npm run dev`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This error will be displayed with both the `npm run build` and `npm run dev`
```

> command. These details are necessary for the documentation quality, so it

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
commands. These details are necessary for the documentation quality, so it
```

won't build without such errors being resolved.

> To resolve this error, rebuild the snippets with "npm run get_snippets" or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To resolve this error, rebuild the snippets with the "npm run get_snippets" or
```

> "pnpm run get_snippets" command. A new file should appear in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the "pnpm run get_snippets" command. A new file should appear in
```

`src/snippets`.

If there is no new file, make sure that `snippet_sources.json` contains the

> path to that snippet. Make sure the doc comment in said file matches the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
path to that snippet. Also, make sure the doc comment in the said file matches the
```

name in the snippet tabs definition.

## Internals

### Vue tab component

> The custom component file, that displays tabs is called `SnippetTabs.vue`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The custom component file that displays tabs is called `SnippetTabs.vue`.
```

> It is located in `.vitepress/theme/components/` directory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is located in the `.vitepress/theme/components/` directory.
```

```typescript
import Vue3TouchEvents from 'vue3-touch-events'
import SnippetTabs from './components/SnippetTabs.vue'
// …
export default {
  // …
  enhanceApp({ app }) {
    app.use(Vue3TouchEvents)
    app.component('SnippetTabs', SnippetTabs)
  },
}
```

> It is using the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It uses the
```

[Vue3TouchEvents](https://github.com/robinrodricks/vue3-touch-events)

> plugin for mobile support. To install it, use `npm i vue3-touch-events` or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
plugin for mobile support. To install it, use the `npm i vue3-touch-events` or
```

> `pnpm i vue3-touch-events` command.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the `pnpm i vue3-touch-events` command.
```

> Finally, a [Vue](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vue.js) component is called by [VitePress](https://vitepress.vuejs.org/) to display the result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, a [Vue](https://vuejs.org/guide/essentials/component-basics.html) component is called by [VitePress](https://vitepress.vuejs.org/) to display the result.
```

Wikipedia, really?..

```javascript
{
    markdown: {
        config(md) {
            md.use(footnote);
            snippets_plugin(md, {'snippet_root': resolve(__dirname, '../src/snippets/')})
        }
    }
}
```

Note that `snippet_root` directory path is required, otherwise the user has to point out the paths.

### Error handling, IO and monads

> While the examples are being downloaded, parsed, highlighted and exported, there are several similar situations that require both error handling and awaiting the result. Internally, this is solved with a [monad](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monad_(functional_programming)). Monads are not a part of [TypeScript](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TypeScript) syntax, but still could be used as a design pattern[^2].

Reviewer: TypeScript wikipedia -> https://www.typescriptlang.org/

# Code snippets

Iroha development happens around three important branches:
[`dev`](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha/tree/iroha2-dev),
[`stable`](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha/tree/iroha2-stable), and
[`LTS`](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha/tree/iroha2-lts).

With that in mind, documenting all the API versions manually has
limitations: at some point, the content in one of the branches will be
different compared to the documentation. Moreover, code in the
documentation may contain typos sometimes, and being able to run it won't
be guaranteed without testing. This raises questions about showing the
differences between branches for the new developers semi-automatically.

Our solution is to use a custom syntax in the code comments to mark the
snippets with the [dst-parser](https://github.com/soramitsu/dst-parser). We
configure URLs in a custom JSON config file and automatically query the
related URLs both on local builds and CI.

In addition, we're also using a custom
[markdown-it](https://github.com/markdown-it/markdown-it) plugin, so that
we can easily include the resulting snippets.

## Workflow

### Preparing the requirements

> After you run `npm install` or `pnpm install`, a prebuilder script may run.

Reviewer: Don't mention `npm` here. To avoid problems, anyone should use `pnpm` in our project.

Author: I will remove all the mentions of NPM.

> It would ensure that an output directory for the snippets (`src/snippets`)

Reviewer 2: So there is a possibility it doesn't ensure the existence of this directory?

Author: There was a discussion on potentially removing it.
